---
layout: default
title: Printing, variables, and datatypes
permalink: /python/02/
---

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between; width: 100%; align-items: center;">
  <div><a href="/python/01/">&lt; Setting up Python</a></div>
  <div style="position: absolute; left: 50%; transform: translateX(-50%);">Printing, variables, and datatypes</div>
  <div>WIP &gt;</div>
</div>
<br>

Today we'll be learning printing, variables, and datatypes.

First, create a new python file (name it whatever) and open it in your preferred editor. Write the following line:

<pre><code class="language-python">print("Hello World")</code></pre>

Then run the code. In the console, you should see Hello World outputted.

Congratulations, you just wrote your first line of code in Python!

Let's walk through what this code does:

`print`: This is the main function we are calling. `print` outputs text to the console.  
`()`: These go around the data we want to feed into the function.  
`""`: This go around the text, which tells the function we are using a string datatype (more on that later).  
`Hello World`: This is the text we want to print  

When coding, it's important to follow the **syntax**. Syntax is the specific format you have to write code in, in order for the computer to read it properly.

Try changing the contents of that code to output something else. Make sure to keep the text within the `""` and `()`.

You can have multiple print statements, like this:

<pre><code class="language-python">print("Hello World")
print("How are you doing?")</code></pre>

## Variables
Variables are a way to store data that can be used multiple times. Here's an example:

<pre>
<code class="language-python">a = "Hello World"
print(a)</code>
</pre>

This code does two things:
1. Sets the variable `a` to `"Hello World"`
2. Prints the contents of that variable.

Notice how we didn't put quotes around the variable when printing it. This is because you only put `""` around strings, like when we set `a` to `"Hello World"`.

## Datatypes
There are several types of data in Python, each with their own syntax and properties. Here's a few of them:

### String:
We've been usings strings so far here. You must put `""` around strings, and they can hold any text.  
**String examples:**  
"Hello World"  
"Hi, my name is Kraggle09"  
"I love pizza"  

### Interger:
An interger (int) is just a number. You can put any non-decimal number in an int, and unlike strings, you don't need to put `""` around them.  
**Interger examples:**  
`42`  
`193`  
`3`  

### Float:
A float is like an int, but supports decimals.  
**Interger examples:**  
`3.14`  
`0.01`  
`3.333333`  

You can mix and match different datatypes easily in python, like this:
<pre>
<code class="language-python">money = 438.29
score = 87
print("How much money do I have?")
print(money)
print("What percentage score did I get?")
print(score)
print("Am I happy?")
print("Yes")</code>
</pre>

Notice how variables can hold not only strings, but also intergers, floats, and many other data types.

## Comments
Finally, I want to quickly touch on comments. Comments allow you to add notes to you code, like this:
<pre>
<code class="language-python"># This sets a variable
a = "Hello World"</code>
</pre>

Anything within a comment won't be read by the computer, so you can put anything in a comment without messing up your program.

You can also add a comment inline with normal code:
<pre>
<code class="language-python">a = "Hello World" # This sets a variable</code>
</pre>